Welcome to this course module. In the last course module about routing, we had first contact with
observables.
Now I want to dive deeper into observables in this section.
Now you could create a whole course about observables,
so we're not going to dive that deeply into them but I want you to understand what observables actually
are and what you could use them for and why Angular uses them.
So what is an observable? An observable basically can be thought of as a data source.
Now in our Angular project, an observable basically just is an object we import from a third-party package,
RxJS. The observable here is implemented in a way that it follows the observable pattern,
so we have an observable and we have an observer. In between,
we have a stream, a timeline
and on this timeline, we can have multiple events emitted by the observable or data packages
you could say emitted by the observable, depending on the data source of that observable of course.
So the observable could emit data because you trigger it to do so,
you can do that programmatically,
it could be connected to a button and therefore whenever the button is clicked, an event in a data package
is emitted automatically or as the Angular HTTP service does it,
it's connected to a HTTP request.
So when the response returns, the response is emitted as a data package
and there are dozens of other data sources too,
we will have a look on where to find more soon.
So as I said, the other part is the observer,
this actually is your code you could say. It's the subscribe function you saw earlier or at least it
has something to do with that.
There, you have three ways of handling data packages -
you can handle the normal data, you can handle errors or you can handle the completion of the observable
because these are the three types of data packages you can receive and in these hooks, in these
boxes you could say, your code gets executed.
So you can determine what should happen if I receive a new data package, what should happen if I receive
an error,
what should happen when the observable eventually completes? Side note, an observable doesn't have to
complete,
there are observables, for example hooked up to a normal button, which never complete because how would
you know when it completes?
A user could click the button how often the user wants right.
Other observables, like the HTTP request on the other hand, will have a clear end and will complete eventually
because once the response is there, what else should happen, it's done.
So this is how the observable pattern generally works
and of course you use it to handle asynchronous tasks because all these data sources here, user events
triggered in your code or a HTTP request are asynchronous tasks, you don't know when they will happen
and you don't know how long they will take.
So if you execute your normal application code, you don't want to wait for these events or you don't
want to wait for the completion of such a HTTP request because that would block your program, would block
your logic.
Therefore, we need methods of handling such asynchronous tasks
and historically you might have used callbacks or promises
and it's not necessarily bad to use them, observables is just a different approach of handling that, a
different alternative and Angular embraces observables which is why I chose to explain these because
Angular uses them a lot and actually, observables have one major advantage,
their operators, which I will show later in the section too. Back to this slide,
so we got our observable and we get our observer with the three buckets you could say or with the three
hooks where different code is executed depending on the type of package we receive and then exactly
this happens,
the observables might emit a couple of normal data packages,
it might emit an error or eventually, it might get completed and the respective code is then executed.
So that's the theory,
let's now take a closer look in our actual project.